Oh man, Solomon it's dot
com. It's Hanselman. It's a
weekly discussion with web developer
and technologist Scott Hanselman hosted
by Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan
announcing show number 37 recorded
Monday, October 16th, 2006. Support for Hansel
minutes is provided by COVID
Smith tools, makers of code
Smith and extensible tip the
base code generator for.net. Hanselman
is listeners. Get $100 off
COVID Smith professional with coupon
code H M 100. online@covidsmithtools.com
and buy slash N software
makers of RSS bus letting
you easily create RSS feeds
from databases, spreadsheets, emails, and
directories online@wwwdotrssbus.com. Support is also
provided by exceeds zip for.net,
which lets you handle zip
tar and jesus' files on
FTP servers in streams in
memory and more. Now get
20% off any exceed component
or suite just for listening
to Hansel minutes, go to
shrinks.com/fpt and use the code
H M dash 20 dash
20. Support is also provided
by.net developers journal. The world's
leading.net developer magazine online at
www dot  dot com.
In this episode has got
interviews of one and only
Scott Guthrie. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman. We've got another interview
for you here on Hansel
minutes where the podcast we
promise not to waste your
time. And I'm sitting here
with Scott Guthrie. And what is
your title now? It's group
all seeing eye. Yeah, I'm,
I'm basically a general manager
in the developer division. So
I basically run all of
our.net developer platform pieces. So
like the CLR Avalon or
WPF asp.net, Atlas, windows forms,
commerce server, I S done
it covered a few other
things. So, so that's, that's
a lot of power and
influence that includes yeah. The
developer experience and the base
class library. Yes. Yeah. And
includes the developer experience, the
base cost of library now.
So run the, the, of
the visual studio tools, specifically
targeting development and client development.
And you ran the ESPN
net team for a very
long time. So I assume
you have a soft spot
for asp.net amongst all of
your new properties. Sure. Yeah.
Yeah. I, I kind of
helped start the ESPN team
way back when, and, and
yeah. Ran a long time
ago and yeah, so it's
still definitely a soft spot
in my heart. So There
was some recent rebranding of
the Atlas framework if the
branding is what now? Yeah.
So we recently rebranded Alice.
Alice was kind of the
code name for our Ajax
libraries and we basically are
using two names for it.
One is the client side
Java script library, which we're
calling the Microsoft Ajax library
and that can be used
with any development platform out
there to, you know, we
have samples on PHP and
cold fusion and Java and
obviously asp.net. And then also
there's a whole bunch of
server side infrastructure that provides
kind of a nice clean
programming model to take advantage
of it. And that we're
calling the ASP net Ajax
extensions. Are you seeing a
lot of people decide to
just take the JavaScript client
library and use that? Yes
and no. I think what
we're seeing is we're certainly
seeing a lot of people
use the clients that JavaScript
library. And you typically, I
see with Ajax apps, people
will typically do one of
two things. One is build
what we kind of call
a server side Ajax approach
or a client site, Ajax
approach and clients at Ajax
approach makes, you know, it's
probably the easiest to explain
and that's where you're running
lots of JavaScript on the
client. And you're, you're typically
the locus of control for
the application is on the
client, inside the browser. And
so your, your, your navigation
logic and a lot of
your interaction logic is client
side. And then we're seeing
a lot of people do
what we call kind of
server-side Ajax. And there you
are using Ajax to effectively
transfer HTML back and forth
between the server and you
still retain most of the
logic and most of the
kind of navigation control on
the server and you're using
Ajax to effectively have kind
of niftier effects. And with
Atlas, we support both models.
And so people can just
use a pure client side
approach, or what we're seeing
is more people are actually
using the server side approach
where they're, you know, they're,
they're effectively adding kind of
smooth Ajax expects to their
app without having to write
a lot of Java script
or rewrite their apps in
a pretty substantial way. So
a lot of people have
been talking about the update
panel and some, some people
have said kind of disdainfully
that this is the cop-out
version of Ajax in the
sense that you can take
a site that's not Ajax
ified and Ajax defy it
by just using this update
panel. And I think it
was really nice the way
that you kind of juxtapose
the client side Gmail style.
And I can a model
view controller where the controller
is really on the, on
the big penny and four
of the, of the user,
the end user can get
that machine doing some work
versus a service side, this
update panel, this, this is
some kind of weird hybrid.
I mean, are we making
Frankenstein's monsters when we build
these? Or is that just
really a bridge? Is it
a gateway drug, you know,
to get you started? Well,
do you have any panels?
I think an example of
how you use kind of
server-side Ajax we're, we're effectively,
you are, you know, your
code is running on the
server in response to say
a form submit or a
client site interaction. You're, you're
going back to the server
and what your, what the
uptick panel lets you do
is return the HTML for
a region of a page.
So you're not returning the
entire page. You're only returning
a small snippet of HTML
encapsulate within that update panel
and then it handles updating
it on the coin. And
so it lets you do
animations and it lets you
provide progress bars and enables
a much smoother, richer experience.
You could, for example, drop
a grid view control inside
it and enable server-side paging,
filtering, sorting, editing, deleting all
that stuff with Ajax and
not have to write a
single line of Java script.
And so it's, it's a
very compelling, easy way to
get started with Ajax and,
you know, start enabling your
site to have a smoother
experience without having to learn
frankly many concepts at all.
And so it's certainly a
great way to get started.
You can use it just
by itself. It exposes client
side events. So if you
want to go ahead and,
you know, do Richard transitions
or Richard validation on the
client, you can certainly choose
to do that. But what
we see is a heck
of a lot of developers
say, look, I don't want
to write 20,000 lines of
untight Java script. It doesn't
perform well. There's lots of
different incompatibilities between browsers and
I just don't want to
have to learn something radically
new, you know, controls like
the update panel. And there's
a host of other server
side controls that we shipped
with Atlas or the Atlas
control toolkit. You know, it
makes it brain dead easy
that if you want to,
you know, add, pop up
controls or, you know, smoother
animations or incremental refreshing on
your page, you can do
it without having to learn
much. So like we do
a lot of my company,
we do a lot of
wizards, right? Where nothing on
the page, except maybe, you
know, 400 pixels by 400
pixels in the middle where
we've got a workflow control
and basically we're posting back
and forth view state and
the entire page gets rendered.
All the menuing structured, all
the ads, all that kind
of stuff. If I put
an update panel on that,
my, my, my controls that
do that work, they don't
need to know that anything's
happened right there. They're being
lied to very effectively. Right.
I mean, they're, they think
they're going through the same
page life cycle Before. Yeah,
correct. So, yeah, from a,
from a control perspective, it
means that you can take
your existing, you know, if
you have a wizard control
or you have your own
panels that you're, you're building
kind of a workflow with,
you don't need to rewrite
that you don't need to
massively change it. And now
you can go ahead and
effectively only refresh that portion
of the page that's changed
and not have to rework
anything else on the site.
And so, yeah, it's, it's
not necessarily, you know, if
you want an experience like
Gmail or you want a
really rich mashup that's, you
know, like Paige flakes, which
is a great Atlas site
today, you know, you, you
are going to end up
writing some Java script. You,
you're not going to get
away from that, but for
a heck of a lot
of apps and certainly a
lot of line of business
apps, you know, using techniques
like the update panel and
we have about 26 other
controls in the Atlas control
toolkit. So if you want
to do like nested dropdown
lists, where you during cascading,
where, you know, you pick
one and you want to
update the other, you know,
you can drop the cascading
extender control on the page
point at to existing ESPN,
a dropdown list controls pointed
a web service, and you
don't have to write any
JavaScript to enable it. If
you want collapsible panel support,
you know, it's built in.
So those types of we're
just trying to make really
easy, make it very approachable
and, you know, provide a
way that you don't have
to be a JavaScript expert
in order to actually build
a really cool Ajax. So
you just touched on something
that I think is really
not really well known is
this notion of extend controls.
Now that's a different thing.
That's a different concept, right?
That's not just Ajax proper.
That's something that extends existing
controls. Yeah. The idea behind
an extend or control, it's
something that isn't necessarily Ajax
specific or, or Atlas specific
for that matter. But, but
we have found it very
effective for adding Ajax UI
effects to a site. And
the way it works is
basically you add this extend
or control on a page.
And the pattern is you
point out an existing control
and you're effectively saying, I
want to add some capabilities
to it. So some examples
would be an autocomplete extender.
And so you can drop
this on the page. You
pointed out a text box
and you say here's a
web service that as the
person starts typing in the
text box, I want you
to call, we have animation
extenders. So we point at
saying update panel and say,
when a, when a call
back goes back to the
server, go run this animation
sequence in this location on
the page. So you can
fade in or fade out
or wipes or dissolves or,
you know, put a progress
thing up there. And, and
it's, and it's a super
easy way. It's one of
the things that we've done
with the Atlas control toolkit
is provided a base class
called the control, extend your
base class. And you can
subclass that. And, you know,
typically within less than a
hundred lines of JavaScript and
or VB or C sharp,
the right, the server control
analogy, you can very easily
add a nice JavaScript. Cross-platform,
you know, Ajax behavior that
you can then easily reuse
across sites. And what the
Atlas control tool kit is,
is it's an open source
project. It has Microsoft developers
full time contributing code, but
any, you know, we have,
it's now more developers outside.
Microsoft are contributing code to
it than inside Microsoft, and
anyone can join. They can
contribute their own code. And
we're basically building up a
cool library of these types
of extend or controls. And
so there's watermark extenders, there's
animation extenders. There's a collapsible
panel, expandable panel extenders, there's
modal, pop-up extenders. You know,
there's tons of tons of
cool stuff. And you know,
the benefit from a developer
perspective is you add this
into your toolbox and, you
know, you know, have, you
know, 26 plus controls that
you can point to your
existing apps with the code
you've already written. And go
ahead and Ajax enable many
ways. Now the web 2.0
is really brought up kind
of a design Renaissance. And
a lot of people are
spending a lot more time
looking at their markup, making
clean XHTML. And then we
know that asp.net  has
really great support for different
kinds of rendering. You can
say use legacy rendering. You
can say your vendor strict.
And I understand that some
people weren't necessarily happy with
initially the CSS support, but
you guys have released some
stuff now that makes doing
really great CSS easier. And
that's as an add on,
or what is this? No,
no, it's good. There's a,
one of the things we
introduced To  is a
sensibility point. We call the
control adapters and it's, it's
built into asp.net and it's
fairly fundamental to any control.
And basically the way it
works is you can now
plug in what we call
an adapter, which overrides the
rendering of a control. And
it's not, it's not a
hacky thing. It's not like
we're taking it the, and
transforming it or doing XSLT
or anything like that. It's
basically a way the control
just says, Oh, I'm going
to render my tag or
my set of tags. And
you can plug in and
say, Nope, I'm going to
override it and provide this.
And you can very easily
build these extenders. You can
register them as an assembly.
You change a couple of,
you know, one line in
your dot browser file for
either your machine or for
your site. And now you've
changed the rendering. And so
one of the things that
people have, you know, throughout
the AskPat in this lifetime
have often complained about is,
you know, I want more
control over the output. That's
rendered from a control. And
we did do a lot
of work in the assessment
to, to make sure we
are, we do support XHTML
strict and XHTML transitional from
all of the controls we
render. A lot of people
say, you know what I
want, you know, I want
the menu control the render
Liu elements instead of doing
tables, I want, you know,
I want the grid or
the data details, view control
to, you know, use THS
in a slightly different way.
And so to help with
that, we've been, we've released
something, we call the CSS
control, adapter toolkit, and it's
basically a set of control
adapters. I think there's like
15 or 16 of them
in total. They cover all
the data controls and asp.net,
all the navigation controls. So
like menu and tree view
and things like that, as
well as a whole bunch
of other common controls, logging
controls and things that we
ship. And they basically provide
you a way without having
to write any code. You
can get more CSS, friendly
output from all those controls,
but more importantly, they ship
with VB and C sharp
versions of it. So you
can actually go in and
easily tweak the rendering. So
if you want to further
override it, you can, and
it provides a nice encapsulated
way to do it so
that that's a free download
available today. And again, the
full source code with Redis
and modification rights are provided.
So if, if you really
care a lot about CSS
and, and, and styling your
site in a nice way,
definitely check that out. One
of these, you'll also see
with the next release of
visual studio, which we're calling
the orcas release is also
much richer CSS designer support
built into the IDE. So
it'll make it even easier
to build a really nice
CSS enabled sites. Now I'm
with, with the Everett release
with 2003, we had a
lot of trouble because in
the designer, because we were
trying to do some tricky,
do it ourselves, master pages
type of action. And it
seemed like the design view
of the page went through
a life cycle as if
it were kind of being
instantiated. So we had lots
of checks, like if HTTP
context dot current isn't equal,
no, as the designer surface
fundamentally changed, what is it
that we used to begin
to get into situations where
we couldn't get into design
mode anymore? Because some class
in our hierarchy of pages
would throw an exception what's
changed in the designer to
make it so much easier
to have a good design
view. Yeah, well, we did
a lot of work in
done at two O and
VST thousand five on a
visual studio designer. So, you
know, the big, the big
one that people always have
complained about historically is visual
studio is mangling my HTML
or reformatting issue. So it
no longer does that. It
never changes your HTML format
for you. So that's, that's
a big one. The other
thing that we did and
did is we added a
lot of designer, the API
support, so that as a
control developer, you can very
easily go ahead and see
whether you're in design mode
or not. And, and so
there's an API specifically to
check on that. You can
go ahead and provide a
much richer design editing experiences.
You can support kind of
panel scenarios, where you have
content contained within another control
and design view. You can
do watermarking. There's lots of
much richer support. And then
obviously with PS 2005, we
do have Wiziwig support for
master pages and themes. So,
so that, you know, you
don't have to create your
own controls in order to
enable kind of master page
like scenarios. Pretty much sounds
like putting the developer in
a control of their own
destiny is kind of a
recurring theme. And there's a
bunch of guys at my
work who look at other
JavaScript libraries like prototype Scriptaculous.
It sounds like if I
wanted to use those with
a site, whether I was
using Atlas or not, then
maybe the CSS adapter set
would be what I would
want to use. I could,
I mean, how would I
integrate a third party Ajax
library without making anyone else
upset within the, the, the
designer or the runtime, If
you, if you want to
use, for example, a markup
based ESS, and, and for
some reason, in your Ajax
framework, you have a requirement
for that. You can certainly
use the CSS adapters in
general. You know, there are
people that are using prototype
and Scriptaculous without the CSS
adapters, and that works perfectly
fine as well. One thing
that we did have with
the CTP versions of Atlas
that often made it hard
to integrate both a page
that had, for example, dojo
or prototype prescriptive, Oculus, and
Atlas, all working well together
in a single page is
there were a number of
kind of helper functions with
the same name and the
different libraries. And those would
cause JavaScript conflicts. And of
course being JavaScript, you don't
get compile time errors. You
just get weird runtime errors
depending on the usage and
browser and things like that.
One of the things that
we're doing with the Atlas
release that's coming out shortly,
hopefully very shortly is we've
actually, we've actually changed some
of the library names that
conflicted. So specifically dollar sign
was something that was overloaded
in a couple of different
JavaScript frameworks. And Atlas had
one too. And those conflicted.
So we actually renamed the
Atlas dollar signs specifically. So
you can have a page
that imports the Atlas JavaScript
library, as well as import
say, for example, the prototype
prescriptive Oculus library and the
all work together on the
same page. So enabling that
interrupt is definitely that we're
looking to enable, you know,
Atlas today, you know, provides
what we think is sort
of the super set of
the prototype Scriptaculous support if
you had the control toolkit
with all the animation support.
But yeah, we definitely want
to make sure that, you
know, developers can use whichever
library, they feel works best
for them and, you know,
have it worked great, Is
it it's true that Atlas
is shipping in orcas as
a first class part of
the, the whole environment right
now, Atlas is a separate
download and an orcas. The
next version of is your
studio. It's just, it's just
there. Correct. So Atlas is
going to ship, we're going
to ship a one O
supported version this winter. And,
and so that will be
fully supported, meaning it's a
10 year support lifetime, you
know, the standard Microsoft, you
know, like if you're buying
windows, you get the same
support agreement. And what that
means is that, you know,
you can call up, you
know, midnight, if you have
mission critical app and you
have a bug and you
can get a support engineer
on the line, it's gonna
help you to bug it.
And if you run into
a bug and the product,
we can go ahead and
release a fix for you
to go ahead and fix
it. And so for, for,
for enterprise applications or for
people that want that type
of mission, critical support, you
know, the Atlas one, a
release coming out this year,
we'll provide it. And that
works fine on needs to
be done at two Oh
one with the S 2005.
So it doesn't, it doesn't
require you to upgrade anything.
You can go ahead and
take advantage of that immediately.
And that's, that's a very
conscious decision we wanted to
do is get that out.
You didn't get the support
out as soon as possible.
Cause a lot of people
have been waiting on that
in the orcas release, which
is the next release of
both our visual studio tools,
as well as kind of
our Dutton and framework. We
are going to go ahead
and take the Atlas functionality
and make it directly into
asp.net. So it's not a
separate download. It'll just be,
you know, part of the,
the standard Don and framework
install. And so, yeah, so,
so there it's, it's, it's
not, it doesn't require you
to install something separate and
obviously we'll have much richer
tool support inside visual studio
to, you know, enable Intel
sense and a much richer
designer support for doing Atlas
style functionality. Are there any
other things that are separate
downloads now that'll be baked
into orcas that we should
know about A couple of
the other, a couple of
other things that we're looking
at doing that, that we're
kind of providing as a
separate downloads earlier so that
people can take advantage of
them immediately. Well, you know,
in general, we have quite
a few different, you know,
kind of CTPs or sometimes,
you know, productized things that
are, that are out there.
You know, one of the
bigger ones that the, the
trauma CTP perspective that I
definitely recommend people keep an
eye on and look at
is link, which is our
new data access and query
language integration. And that really
provides a way that from,
you know, C-sharp or VB
or any dominant language that
enables link, you know, data
access just gets radically simpler
and you get sort of
a rich object, relational mapper
style technology with great performance
with IntelliSense compilation, checking, debugging
support, and can just from
a productivity perspective, really blow
you away. And so we
have that CTP of that,
that works on vs 2005
today, and that's going to
be baked in directly into
orcas. And, you know, from
my perspective, I actually think
I'm a big, I'm a
huge link fan. And I
think it's actually going to
be probably the biggest feature
in orcas, but there's lots
of them, you know, Atlas
is going to be a
huge one as well. And
obviously there's going to be
tons of improvements in the
tools. Well, I really appreciate
your taking time out of
your day to share this
with our listeners. And I
hope to see you again.
Yeah, thanks. Well, this has
been another episode of Hansel
minutes. Thank you guys. I
hope we didn't waste your
time. We'll see you next
week.